**Semester Project Overview**

**Table of Contents**

1.  Introduction

2.  Project Context

3.  Personal Project

4.  Group Project

5.  Learning Goals

6.  Learning Outcomes

7.  Reflection

**1. Introduction**

I am Jak Benev, a fourth year student doing ICT & Software Engineering
bachelor at Fontys. Previously have completed a minor in Embrace TEC,
where I researched for a market in which to create a business
opportunity while applying my technological studies and successfully
launched a website. During my internship my focus was on researching the
most efficient audio comparing algorithm and applying it to an existing
application in python. Both of these were before the age of AI and as
technology advances my skills need to adapt, thus this project that
builds upon the collaboration of AI and humans intrigues me.

**2. Group Project Context**

MindLabs and its partners have once again received a Regio Deal subsidy.
This subsidy -- granted by the national government -- aims to strengthen
regions. Under the name 'Digital Innovation District for Society,' a
collaboration is underway between MindLabs, Midpoint Brabant, the
municipality of Tilburg, ROC Tilburg (now called Yonder), BUas, Fontys,
and Tilburg University. The focus is on two ambitions: the development
of interactive virtual humans and the exploration of their serious
applications in society, as well as the growth of the Spoorzone as an
innovation district.

In today\'s world, AI and conversational agents are everywhere. However,
most applications lack realistic human interaction. This prevents people
from relying more on AI technology since they do not have the same
experience as real humans. The virtual human project aims to develop a
more realistic interaction between virtual and real humans.

**3. Personal Project**

My personal project focuses on developing an emotional assistant AI
chatbot that can dynamically recognize and adapt to the user\'s emotions
potrayed through chat. The chat bot will be capable of potraying various
emotions through it\'s avatar, based on the user\'s input. With this
project I aim to cover all learning outcomes encapsulating a full stack
creation of an application.\
\
The repository of my personal project can be found
at <https://github.com/mastirias95/EmotiBot>

**4. Group Project**

The task goals of Virtual human are as follows:

1\) Already existing work needs to be converted. A docker swarm
installation is setup and must be converted to a Kubernetes variant.

2\) Dockerfiles and scripts need to be developed to accommodate AI
models and the necessary tools to interact with them

3\) Create some kind of control/dashboard to monitor and control the
Virtual human.\
\
As the team consists of 5 members, we have split our tasks and my part
is in creating the UI for the dashboard to monitor and control the
Virtual human.

**5. Learning Goals**

**Personal Goals for this Semester**

My primary goals for this semester include:

-   Deepening my understanding of AI technologies and their practical
    applications

-   Exploring Python\'s ecosystem and its prominence in modern software
    development

-   Understanding system integration and inter-service communication

-   Improving professional skills including time management and work
    consistency

-   Enhancing my programming knowledge and technical capabilities

**6. Learning Outcomes Assessment**

**6.1. Learning Outcome 1 - Professional Standard**

Throughout the semester I have kept a clear communication line with
colleagues to discuss advancements, setbacks and expectations. Engaged
with majority of the stakeholder meetings aligning tasks with
stakeholder needs.

**Professional Products**

[Project Proposal Virtual
Human.docx](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/evidence/684786/versions/latest) -
Demonstrates my initial planning around the creation of this project.

[Requirement Analysis Virtual
Human.docx](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/evidence/684787/versions/latest) -
Lists functional and non functional requirements alongside User stories
for this project.

[Research Summary Virtual
Human.docx](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/evidence/684798/versions/latest) -
Describes my research findings, alongside ethical considerations.

**Self-Assessment**

Regardless of the slow start I believe I have accumulated enough
evidence that I follow applied research methods, uphold myself to
professional standard, incorporate feedback from stakeholders and adapt
accordingly. If the end result is the goal, I believe I have
achieved **Proficient** in LO1, however if the entire process is of what
matters I believe due to my rough attendance due to health complications
I wasn\'t able to show my full commitment to my team and teachers, thus
falling slightly short for this semester at **Beggining**.

**6.2. Learning Outcome 2 - Personal Leadership**

My personal development has been adapting with my accumilating knowledge
of AI and the intricacies around it. I believe I found a good spot in my
group where I was able to showcase my deeper understanding of LLM that
not all where aware or wanted to deal with. My continuous learning and
adapting have made it possible for me to keep ontop of the vastly
advancing world of technologies and more specifically my field, AI.

**Professional Products**

[Extending personal project bot according to
feedback](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620501/versions/latest) -
Developing and extending my personal project according to feedback from
teachers.

[Future career
development](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620500/versions/latest) -
Showcases my learning path for the upcoming period in order to achieve
my goal of working with AI

[Peer
reviews](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620518/versions/latest) -
The feedback amongst the group members presented in pulse through
feedpulse and how I addressed it.

\@Actual working bot creation using Gemini API & [Hiding API key to
avoid unauthorized
use](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620497/versions/latest) -
Initial commit to the portfolio, showcasing my hands on approach on
group problems as others did not wish to deal with the bot. The
adjustment of hiding API keys was due to feedback from stakeholder Mark
addressing the group for that.

[Midterm
Evaluation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620510/versions/latest) -
Presents my ability to understand more complex technological issues and
address them with a professional attitude.

**Self-Assessment**

I believe this has been my weakest side, as I have
achieved **Beginning** level only due to a lack of showcasing work and
asking for feedback. In my opinion it is a collaboration of issues,
starting off from a rough beggining where I had no idea what I was going
to tackle this semester as a course, to finding out it is completely new
procedure of teaching, to not understanding at first what the goal of
the project was or how to approach LOs. I couldn\'t really seek guidance
if I had no clear goal. Most of my work was on the backend for
development and having spend majority of the initial part of the project
for research as majority of the technologies were new to me, set me back
as I couldn\'t reflect on feedback.

**Possible improvements**

If I had more time available I would

**6.3. Learning Outcome 3 - Scalable Architectures**

**Professional Products**

[Scalable
Architecture](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620525/versions/latest) -
Presents best what I have achieved with my project for this learning
outcome.

\@Actual working bot creation using Gemini API - Initial implementation
of the bot and how it started with just a API call.

\@Langgraph added to the group project\'s bot - My research and decision
behind selecting langgraph for agent system. For both the group and
personal project this was for the time being an overcomplication to the
project, however as it is a modern technology it will enable easier
future development.

\@Agent system added to the group bot - Initial commits for the group
project development and extension.

[Langgraph agent system (personal
project)](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620517/versions/latest) -
The integration of langgraph in my personal project showcasing my deeper
understanding of the technology.

[Docker
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620522/versions/latest) -
Showcase how I have dockerized the software to allow ease of access
across various operating systems and machines and scale possibilities.

[GDPR
Plan](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620519/versions/latest) -
My planning for my application to be in accordance to protection laws
such as GDPR and future steps.

[GDPR
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620520/versions/latest) -
What I have successfuly implemented in my development of the app in
terms of GDPR laws.

[Ethical
Requirements](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620512/versions/latest) -
Presents the ethical requirements in regard to development of the
application

**Self-Assessment**

Regarding Scalable Architectures I believe I have covered a major part
of the learning outcome with my personal project and have
achieved **Proficient **grade in this learning outcome. Keeping focus on
performance, security and maintability I was able to learn more about
async operations for better performance, adjusted technologies such as
langgraph for future scalability, fine tuned the database for scalable
document storage and looked for efficiency upon implementation of search
functionality thus I chose an API over scraping.

**6.4. Learning Outcome 4 - Development and Operations (DevOps)**

Through the development of CI/CD pipeline, dockeranization of the entire
application and implementation of monitoring tools for reliability and
performance tracking I have learned a lot about what it takes to keep up
and maintain a constant development process.

**Professional Products**

[Docker
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620522/versions/latest) -
Showcases my dockerization of my application to be accessible on various
machines across the globe.

[Data-Migration](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620521/versions/latest) -
Document presents what I have achieved in terms of DevOps with database
changes, updates, management and stability.

[Docker-compose](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620523/versions/latest) -
The deployment and management of multiple services in sync to guarantee
successful launch of software.

[RAG
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620499/versions/latest) -
One of the initial commits showcasing first hands on the technology.

[DevOps
Summary](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620526/versions/latest) -
Encapsulates everything from Monitoring, to CI/CD, to error tracking
with examples of the used code.

[Implementing
Sentry](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620503/versions/latest) [Implementing
Loki](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620504/versions/latest) [Implementing
Grafana](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620505/versions/latest) [Implementing
Terraform](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620507/versions/latest) [Implementing
Prometheus](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620506/versions/latest) -
Present the integration of monitoring tools and examples of dashboard
UI.

**Self-Assessment**

For this Learning Outcome of DevOps I believe I have
achieved **Proficient **grade as I have covered everything listed in the
learning outcome, including having enough time to implement monitoring.

**6.5. Learning Outcome 5 - Cloud Native**

Cloud native has been a challenge for me as more recently majority of
the services have reached out for the cloud storage and operation, it
does come with its complications and issues upon larger scale trouble
shooting, however for my personal project I was able to keep it simple.
Dockerizing the application, utilizing APIs such as the LLM Gemini,
SerpApi for real time google search and finalizing it by deploying on
the cloud through terraform and kubernetes has allowed to tackle various
issues across the board and pass them successfuly.

**Professional Products**

[Cloud
Native](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620527/versions/latest) -
Encapsulation of cloud implementations and achievements.

[Real-time google search
functionality](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620495/versions/latest) -
One of the initial commits for the project and the decision behind
SerpApi over web scraping after extensive research for pros and cons

[Extending personal project bot according to
feedback](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620501/versions/latest) -
The addition of SerpApi for API usage.

[Docker
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620522/versions/latest) & [Docker-compose](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620523/versions/latest) -
Showcasing the dockerization of the application and availability to
launch from anywhere.

**Self-Assessment**

With the tackling of multiple APIs, dockerizing and releasing
successfuly with use cases my application on the cloud through
kubernetes I believe I have achieved grade **Proficient **on this
learning outcome as I have achieved my end goal of having a working bot
that I can interact with at any time without having to have anything
running on my computer as a host.

**6.6. Learning Outcome 6 - Security by Design**

Even though this was not initially a big importance for the project
stakeholder or the group, I dove deeper into the topic with my personal
project and was able to explore far more than just hiding your API keys
in .env

**Professional Products**

[Security
Analysis](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620528/versions/latest) -
Encapsulates the security measures I took upon creating the application.

[Hiding API key to avoid unauthorized
use](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620497/versions/latest) -
One of the initial commits where I started to understand how important
security risks are even from the start

[Security-scan CI
pipeline](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620514/versions/latest) -
CI pipeline for a check for security vulnerabilities through github
actions

**Self-Assessment**

I believe I achieved a grade of **Proficient **in terms of understanding
security risks, implementing tests to avoid such vulnerabilities and
using methods to avoid a pletora of software abuse.

**6.7. Learning Outcome 7 - Distributed Data**

One of the last learning outcomes to tackle not only on this list, but
in my personal work as the bot initially did not require a database as
it kept its history in the codebase, however as I had to adapt my
personal project to GDPR and ethical standards, I had to extend and
adapt the application. My implementation of RAG also required me to look
into database implementation.

**Professional Products**

[Distributed Data
Analysis](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620529/versions/latest) -
Encapsulation of best practices used during the personal project in
terms of Distributed Data

[Data-Migration](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620521/versions/latest) -
How I have handled data migration and scalability

[RAG
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620499/versions/latest) -
Initial implementation of postgreSQL on group project and first hands on
a vertical database

[Extending personal project bot according to
feedback](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620501/versions/latest) -
Personal Project implementation of postgreSQL

[Ethical
Requirements](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620512/versions/latest) -
Ethical requirements that I had to adapt my work in the group project
and personal project towards

[GDPR
Plan](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620519/versions/latest) -
My plan for following global laws for managing user data

[GDPR
Implementation](https://portfolio.drieam.app/portfolio/history/portfolio/28707/evidence/620520/versions/latest) -
How I handled user data according to GDPR laws

**Self-Assessment**

Regarding this learning outcome I believe I have
achieved **Proficient **as I have showcased how I have tackled in
accordance to law and standards user data, how I process data and what I
use it for. Alongside various tools like Alembic for migrations I have
explored what is required for managing distributed and scalable data
systems.

**7. Reflection**

I started this semester with different expectations than what the
program has been. As I have been undergoing my bachelor for a longer
duration than most others, I have studied during different teaching
methods and research based hasn\'t been one of them before. Having to
plan, research, test and fail multiple times before succeding has been
satisfying, even though the start has been rough until I grasp the idea
of what I want to build and how to build it.\
From learning about various libraries and integration capabilities of
the python language, alongside ever-developing world of large language
models with it\'s monthly new advancements, to the cloud infrastructure
and the vastness of tools and providers it has. My last tackle has been
monitoring systems to help observe my creation, a chat bot that is
accessible from anywhere.\
Nevertheless I still have to work on my weaknesses and have a more
methodological process of working with a better structure and
transperancy. That will be one of the main aspects to focus on if I am
to embark on another journey such as this,
